---
title: "The small wins lead to the larger goal"
excerpt: "How the experience of success in individual tasks empowers me to do what my responsibility entails."
---

There is no rainfall today, though it is cloudy and dark right now: a
reminder of yesterday's prevailing conditions. The storm was forecast
to hit us early in the day. It poured for several hours, but was not
too bad. The storm arrived in the evening and ran its course through
the early morning hours. I stayed awake until about 3 AM to be
available for any urgent intervention to my flood control project. I
visited the stream several times, the last one being before I went to
bed, judging that the situation was under control.

The intensified water flow had pushed aside a large pile of canes and
rocks I had placed on one side. Though it did not displace some old
doors and other junk I had lined up as reinforcements to the ground.
At the crack of dawn, I revisited the spot to start work anew. My goal
was to resume the effort of redirecting the stream such that it does
not crash againt my land at a perpendicular angle: that causes soil
erosion. It must instead flow by the side. I eventually moved around
large parts of soil, gravel, and stone, as well as broken branches and
anything else I could find. I fortified a section of the ground that I
had already worked on before but which was still susceptible to
erosion. It looks good for the time being.

This flood control project nears a full year of work. There have been
several setbacks in the meantime, though the results are largely in my
favour. I am encouraged to press on with the hard work because every
time I do something I notice progress. My actions affect my
environment. I understand that my fate is partially of my doing. If I
sit idly by, hoping that somehow the world will work in my favour, I
will only bear witness to a catastrophe that has the potential of
threatening my presence in this land. If instead, I assume
responsibility, there is a chance that I will subsist here long-term.

Responsibility is hard. We conventionally expect it from everybody who
is a legal adult, though we know it is not merely a function of
ageing. Everybody wants to be free to do as they see fit, though few
understand that the freedom to act is inseparable from the bondage to
the consequences it engenders. To be free is to accept what your
actions do to you. Thus, you learn to exercise your freedom wisely.

This is why responsibility cannot, in fact, be bestowed upon a person
through edict. It is instilled as state of mind, through education,
everyday experiences, and the pressing necessity of the circumstances.
We are responsible only when we rise up to the occasion, accepting
what the task entails. There is no going back from it. You commit all
the requisite deeds, are thoughtful in your plans, and decisive in
your actions. If you cannot operate along those lines, then
responsibility is but a burden that will crush you; a choice made
freely that you regret shortly thereafter, implicitly lamenting that
very freedom you had.

My responsibility, then, is to do the work no matter what, such that
the hut project is sustainable. I am successful thus far and remain
unflinching in my commitment to the original goal. What empowers me to
keep going, to not feel lazy in the morning, and to not shy away from
the stream's ice cold waters, are all those small wins I have achieved
and continue to experience. I understand there is a feedback loop
between my capacity for purposeful action and the consequences
thereof.

If every attempt of mine resulted in utter failure, if I would be
losing ground each time despite my best efforts, I would start to
question my ability to realise my ambitions. Because of the experience
of success in the individual tasks that constitute this larger
endeavour, I have forged the mentality of success: I can do this. I am
more courageous, but not reckless; more resilient, albeit not
unbreakable.

This is all due to the longer-term perspective that informs my
judgement. The small wins are contributing to an eventuality I have
envisaged and am meticulously working towards. I have long-now
answered the "why" which underpins all of my actions. It is for this
reason that I am patient and unwavering in the face of evolving states
of affairs.

There is a mental component to what I do, though I cannot see how this
determination of mine would have been embedded in my conscience, let
alone persisted, if all experience hitherto was running counter to it.
The small wins are essential. They are the routines which continuously
affirm that there is potential for success; that my efforts are not in
vain, relative to my stated objectives.

The positive feedback I receive when an action of mine has the desired
effect on my environment, gives me the knowledge I need to believe in
myself. It is what sustains the longer-term goal, rendering it as
realistic, even if it is not easy. The small wins do not make me
delusional though. They do not inflate my confidence about my capacity
to perform excellently in every field of endeavour. No. They merely
remind me that I can cope with this type of work. This is all I need,
anyway, for such was the responsibility I assumed when I freely made
this bold step forward. I will continue to do what I must. What
happens next is for the gods of this world to decide.
