---
title: "Re: are you a Stoic and what is your philosophy?"
excerpt: "My answer to the question of whether I am a Stoic and what my philosophy is in a nutshell."
---

The following text is an excerpt from an exchange that I am sharing
with the permission of my correspondent without disclosing their
personal information.

* * *


> I wanted to ask you whether you consider yourself to be a Stoic.
> What is your philosophy exactly? Could you give me a brief
> explanation?
>
> I would like to learn about Stoicism, but I don't know where to start,
> so I thought I could consult you for this.

I do not consider myself a Stoic, though there are elements of my
thought that are found in Stoic works as well. I do not subscribe to a
specific school of thought, as I draw influences from various sources,
ancient and contemporary, combined with my own thinking and
temperament.

The way I see Stoicism from a modern perspective is as the gateway to
the ancient world of Greece and pre-Christian Rome. It is a throwback
to an era when people were polytheistic: they had a completely
different worldview than the predominant one we are immersed in, even
if some of them were not religious per se.

This is my outlook as well. I do not consider myself religious, though
if I was forced to identify with a certain tradition it would be with
polytheism in the broadest sense. And because I am most familiar with
my own culture, this polytheism would be the ethnic Greek religion.
Though, again, I must stress that I am not religious.

Fundamentally, polytheism is the view of the world as oneness, hence
the Greek word for "universe" is "synpan" (σύμπαν) which is a
composite of words we find in English as well, namely, "syn" (like
"synthesis" or "symbiosis" or even "system") and "pan" (like
"pandemic", "panther", "panorama"). "Syn" means "together" or
"jointly" or "plus", while "pan" means "all". The universe, then, is
the joint presence of everything and, thus, the common participation
of all presences in the continuum of life. Oneness, of course, implies
that all that is, is of one substance, hence consubstantiality. The
multitude is an expression of the multifacetedness of the one, in the
same way we can express an entire world of representations with just
binary language.

It is for this reason that the polytheist will identify the divine
everywhere as a pattern in the cosmos. Gods or god (which are
interchangeable, by the way) is not outside the world but always
"there". Polytheists will give it a name to make it easier to talk
about it and will then analyse it into its specific manifestations.
Hence archetypes such as harmony, beauty, wisdom, are described as the
deities of Apollon, Aphrodite, Athena. One does not need to believe in
or to worship those gods in order to recognise the presence of the
archetypes they reference. Harmony exists with or without faith in
Apollon, for instance.

Names and imagery are for people. Apollon does not need prayers to
exist and humans do not need to perform rituals in his name for
harmony to be part of the cosmos---it always is. There is no need for
any kind of convincing or proselytising. Names and imagery help people
relate to the greater magnitudes of this world and to communicate with
each other. Thoughtful imagery and narratives also have didactic value
as well as staying power: they capture the imagination and can be
passed down through generations even without any writings. But the
specifics of those symbols are of no import when it comes to the
underlying principle of oneness.

Against this backdrop, we understand the significance of Logos. This
is the Greek word for "reason" (as in "reasonable"), "ratio",
"pattern", "cause", "speech" or more broadly "language". All these
significations apply to the cosmos at-large. Everywhere we look we
find pattern and structure. There is cause and effect, which is a
feedback loop of presence and absence, else of communication. The more
we study the world, the more we realise how there is reason embedded
in things and that absolute chaos ("logoslessness", if you will) does
not exist.

The early Stoics stress the importance of logos because the Greeks
already believed in its immanence and could directly make sense of the
greater points. Logos is always there (and, anyway, logos as a concept
predates the Stoics, such as in the works of Herakletos). As such, I
understand the central Stoic dictum of "live in accordance with
nature" (κατά φύσην ζην) to be an appeal to the person to recognise
the world all around them and to not be misled by unattainable wants.
It is, in other words, a call to practicality and the concomitant
reasonableness.

But this Stoic dictum cannot be appreciated in full independent of the
preexisting tradition of the three core Delphic maxims: (i) "know
yourself" (γνώθι σεαυτόν), (ii) "nothing in excess" (μηδέν άγαν), and
(iii) "certainty is beside ruin" (εγγύα παρά δ'Άτα). Those precepts
are taken as a tandem. They are instructions for the person to know
who they are, which necessarily means that one must study the world
around them (because of the aforementioned oneness). In the process of
learning, one must try to find moderation, so as to not push towards
unsustainable extremes. And their inquisitive outlook must be couched
in terms of dubitativeness, otherwise misplaced certainty leads to
catastrophe (actually, the literal translation of that maxim is
"guarantees beside Ate", where "Ate" is the goddess of ruin).

From an ancient perspective, then, the Stoics (at least the early
ones) are yet another way of expressing ideas that were already in
circulation. There is value to this in all eras, as even the things we
know we can see them again through a slightly different prism or in
relation to something new and thus gain a new appreciation of them.

Anyway, I do not want to belabour the point I am making: Stoicism
decoupled from its polytheistic underpinnings is an empty shell.

Finally, to your question on where to start. I always prefer original
sources over derivatives. For example, the Enchiridion of Epictetos is
a good place to start. Once you read that, you will have new ideas
which will help you formulate the next queries.

Good luck and remember that the whole point is to continuously
discover ourselves and the world rather than to pick a
school/gang/dogma to fight for, as certainty is right next to
disaster.
