---
title: "Re: parasocial relationships, communication skills, fame, etc."
excerpt: "Excerpt from a private exchange where I comment on a number of themes including parasocial relationships, communication skills, and fame."
---

This is an excerpt from a private exchange. I am sharing it with the
permission of my correspondent, without disclosing their identity.

* * *

> I admire you Protesilaous, in many ways. I'm not the parasocial
> type, and I do not know you personally. What I will say though, is
> the presence and identity you have created on the internet is
> something I have found myself resonating with. I appreciate the
> channel, with the hut project and your talks. Emacs of course is
> something I've always been interested in too.

Parasocial relationships have a negative connotation, perhaps because
they typically apply to how we relate to some celebrity like those pop
stars. I can understand why that kind of relationship is not
constructive, though in our case there is a different dynamic. Look,
you can message me and I reply as soon as possible. This is not how it
goes if you try to contact some famous person.

I still think face-to-face interactions are the best because they help
you understand that you are dealing with a normal person instead of
some "personality". It thus is an exchange among equals.

The kind of publications one makes are also an indication of who they
are. Not all Internet people are the same. In my case, I enjoy
writing/talking about the things I care about. In the process, my self
is expressed through my works because I think that only then do my
publications have value. If I talk about self-love, for example, as I
did on January 1st, I do it because I have lived those experiences and
know how they feel. It is not simply some cool idea I thought I could
do a video about.

> - What advice would you give someone that struggles to communicate
> when they want to create a name for themselves?

Communication skills can be improved. You will get better at
expressing your thoughts the more you keep doing it. Thus, the
prerequisite is to not be afraid of failure (perceived or otherwise).
It is okay to make mistakes. Keep trying and be honest about your
weaknesses. People take kindly to those who try in earnest, even if
they are not the best.

This is how I am treated, for example. People are kind to me although
they understand I am not the foremost expert. I do not have formal
training in any of my current activities, for example, such as
philosophy or programming. I just try to the best of my abilities and
make no pretences about being great. As such, I do not fool anybody
into thinking that I am some faultless authority. I am just a regular
fellow.

Keep that authenticity intact and the rest will follow.

About making a name for yourself, I do not know what you have in mind
so I will remain generic. If it is something based on excellence, then
your focus must be on the skill itself. If you are good at something,
chances are you will be recognised accordingly.

People nowadays become famous by doing whatever the social media
algorithm favours, so they end up acting as someone who is not their
true self. They may make money and have lots of admirers, but in the
process they have bound themselves to a life of role-playing, of
having to keep up their persona the whole time. Is this the life you
want for yourself? And if the answer is yes, then consider whether you
would like to have a true friend by your side or someone who only
values you because you are popular.

We do not appreciate the basics until it is too late. In the process,
we get distracted by the glamour of success. Legend has it that the
ancient sage Solon once had an exchange with Croesus, a king of a
country close to Greece. The king fancied himself as the happiest man
alive. He had money, he had fame, he had all a king could wish for! So
he was happy in the conventional sense. Solon remarked that none can
be considered happy before their story is concluded (_μηδένα προ του
τέλους μακάριζε_ literally means "none before the end consider
happy"). The kingdom of Croesus eventually fell to war and he was
executed.

We all experience suffering equally, just as we all appreciate an
honest hug. For as long as we keep this shared nature in mind, we will
not think of ourselves as anyhow special. Then, no matter where we
are, we will remain mindful of the fact that our place is
fundamentally the same as all other places in this space.

> - What are your thoughts on doom emacs? 🤣

It is a high quality project that helps a lot of people. I have never
used it myself because I made a conscious effort to learn Emacs from
scratch and to piece together a configuration whose every bit I
understood (or, at least, I was aware of the reasoning behind each
choice).

The best lifestyle quality of Emacs is that it empowers you to be
unapologetically opinionated about your preferences. No matter what
others think is best for an Emacs setup, you do the thing that works
for you and that is all that matters. If Doom works for you or anyone
else, then my opinion is not required for you/them to be productive.

> - What videos are you most proud of?

I like every video I make because I do it in a way that captures the
moment. I find mistakes in retrospect, such as "sitting on the table"
instead of "sitting at the table", or I notice that I could have said
something in a more clear way and used a better example. But I have no
regrets. They all show an imperfect person, which is wonderful, and
they all contribute to who I am right now.

> - What programs are you most proud of making?

Same as with my videos: every piece of code I write is an expression
of my current ability. As all those little moments form the person I
am, I appreciate them all. For the big thing to come about, lots of
smaller things have happened before: nothing occurs in a vacuum.

> None of these questions need to be answered, but I will ask them! I
> hope we can have a conversation some day. Thank you, prot.

Well, it so happens that I always reply to those who contact me, so
here we are!
