---
title: "Re: are you okay with AI bots training on your content?"
excerpt: "Excerpt from a private exchange where I share my view on whether I agree to my publications being used to train artificial intelligence models."
---

The following is an excerpt from a private exchange that I am sharing
with the permission of my correspondent. I am not disclosing their
personal details.

* * *

> I've been doing some research on bot blocklists and such. I looked
> at your website's robots.txt and noticed that you don't block any
> crawlers. May I ask you why? What do you think about the fact that
> ChatGPT has been trained (and will be trained) on your work?

Before answering your questions, allow me to provide a big-picture
view of my approach to the issue.

My principal reservation about artificial intelligence (I am not going
into technical terms of LLMs, AGI, etc.) is political and is not about
the technology as such: it is a matter of ownership and access which
can only be addressed holistically through thoroughgoing reforms. In
general, I am sceptical of any form of highly concentrated and
exclusive control, as it typically results in abuse. This can take
many forms, such as familial (e.g. a patriarch/matriarch that is
intolerant towards new forms of expression among the younger
generations), legal-institutional (e.g. a dictator that defies
constitutional norms to the longer-term detriment of the country's
wellness), religious (e.g. a hierarch that twists people's religiosity
to raise an army of fanatics), economic (e.g. billionaires
circumventing fair competition to entrench their businesses),
historical (e.g. a figure you cannot criticise which is used to
justify current malpractices), and social (e.g. celebrities that
manipulate people into parasocial relationships and other types of
questionable behaviour).

These are analytical constructs. In actuality, phenomena will tick
more than one box as there are permutations between extremes and
combinations of various qualities. The point is that whenever power
rests in few or increasingly fewer loci, it suffers from a mismatch
between relevance and competence or, to put it differently, it is far
away from those caught in the events. If a person living in Europe
decides what will happen to the village of someone in Asia, they are
not making the best decision for the latter's well-being simply
because the realities of each one's life are different and so are
their respective priorities or sensitivities. Exclusive control
becomes abusive the more detached it is from the particularities of
the case because it no longer notices the nuances therein. In legal
terms, it violates the principle of subsidiarity and is likely to be
insensitive to the connatural principle of proportionality.

There are concerns I have about the technology, such as matters of a
transhuman sort (falling in love with a bot, some company planting
chips in your brain, ...), though those ultimately resolve to---or are
anyhow defined by---the aforementioned basics of control.

In purely technical terms, I think artificial intelligence is a
remarkable achievement and one that will mark a new era of human
civilisation. As with every innovation, it brings with it amazing
opportunities, the extent of which we cannot fully fathom yet, while
it also heralds the start of a whole new range of problems from
quotidian affairs to international relations. I think it is a mistake
to be categorically for or against this evolution, as it is neither
good nor bad. Just how our current world or those that have preceded
it are a mixture of positives and negatives. My stance is thus more
nuanced: I have no longing for some mythical past when things were
ostensibly perfect---it was always messy, just in different ways.

Now to your questions. I am largely ignorant about the scope of the
`robots.txt`. What do I need to know about it that will improve my
website? And what does that improvement pertain to? I am happy to make
any change that benefits the dissemination of my content. Note that my
website is 14 years old and seems to be working fine, so I am not sure
what to make of this.

As for what I think about my publications being used to train AI, I
raise no objection. My works are all public and I consider them part
of the wider corpus of human creativity. They are not mine anymore
than they are yours, notwithstanding conventional notions of
authorship and ownership. When I express an idea, I make a connection
that is in the potential of the cosmos and which anyone else can thus
recognise and assume as part of their own thoughts. Nobody can ever
restrict the idea: even if they inhibit its circulation through legal
and technical means, the idea as such remains graspable and is not
reducible to a finite quantity (which could then be made exclusive).

When I use expressions such as "my works" or "I think", I do not imply
that I am the only one capable of developing or holding those ideas. I
simply convey an impression about their origin relative to what I am
aware of. I am nevertheless mindful of the fact that I do not exert
exclusive control over the very endowment of my talents, the
happenstances that stimulate my mind, the connections my being makes,
and the dynamic interplay of factors in any given case. Everything I
do unfolds in the continuum of this world, so it is essentially
arbitrary to claim as my own that which is not strictly internal and
specific to me.

For example, I am now writing this argument in response to your
questions ("your questions" in the same sense as "my works"). Is the
argument exclusively mine given that the questions which triggered it
are not? Can I even isolate myself to test whether I could develop the
same thoughts minus this stimulus? Would it have been exactly the same
in a vacuum? What would even be the argument were it not to depend on
any prior thoughts of mine, which themselves synthesise the notional
internal with the external (i.e. which do not happen in a vacuum)?
Where do we draw this indelible line of "mine" versus "yours" or
"theirs"? Put simply, what I have---and who I am---is not a closed
system.

Think of it also in terms of some old song that exists in your
tradition. Nobody knows the original composer. Their name is lost to
time. Yet each of your people can participate in the experience of the
song. There is no sense in which one's experience precludes that of
another. There is no inherent exclusivity.

I thus consider it dishonest to then claim something circumstantial
---the products of me in relation to my environment---as inseparable
from some assumed constant of "me" or selfhood. In simple terms, I do
not truly own and cannot identify with anything out there: I am, at
best, a messenger or a user of ideas (colloquially "my ideas"). All I
then do is extend this outlook to my beliefs about property in
general, where I only see a practical need for having some belongings
that are finite in order to live. Matters of thought are for everyone,
including bots whose ownership structure I may not like.
