---
title: "My 'Brown University Interviews' on Emacs and life"
excerpt: "My interview about Emacs and general themes related to university education and mountain life."
---

[ **UPDATE 2025-03-08 10:16 +0200:** The original website is down, so
  I am showing the entire interview here. I am not modifying the
  original text of the publication I made here. The interview is after
  the heading "The original interview now that their website is down". ]

I was interviewed by Kristoffer Balintona from Brown University about my
participation in the free software and Emacs communities, as well as
general themes related to university education and mountain life.

The publication is [“Stand up and tell people that you cannot just be
the red carpet upon which others will parade.” — Brown Interviews
Protesilaos
Stavrou](https://browninterviews.org/stand-up-and-tell-people-that-you-cannot-just-be-the-red-carpet-upon-which-others-will-parade-brown-interviews-protesilaos-stavrou/).

Quote from the introduction:

> Born in Greece in 1988, Protesilaos Stavrou is involved in the
> [Linux](https://opensource.com/resources/linux) (alternative to
> Windows and MacOS; an open-source operating system) and
> [Emacs](https://opensource.com/resources/what-emacs) (extensible and
> versatile text editing software used by programmers, authors,
> bloggers, and more) communities. Stavrou is a philosopher; he releases
> video essays on
> [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/c/ProtesilaosStavrou/videos) and
> writings on his [blog](https://protesilaos.com/) which blend distant
> philosophies related to free and open source software and Unix to law
> and politics. Stavrou has a formal education in European politics, law
> and economics, intellectually specializing in the European Union’s
> Economic and Monetary Union and having previously worked in
> politics-related fields including as a parliamentary assistant at the
> European Parliament.
> 
> In this interview we discuss his experience building a small yet loyal
> internet following, the philosophy of thinking for yourself and living
> on your own terms, the role of a university education, living in the
> mountains, and the facets of his humanity not often revealed online.

Thanks to Kristoffer Balintona for approaching me for a call and then
transcribing the whole thing!

* * *

P.S. The picture in the interview is from April (I had to borrow a phone
to take it).  In other words, the beard is longer now :)

The following is just a backup in case Brown Interviews ever disappears.

## The original interview now that their website is down

**Kristoffer Balintona: Let’s talk about your YouTube channel. Why did you
decide to make one?**

Protesilaos Stavrou: I actually wanted to practice my English. I know it
seems odd since my content is not at all related to that, but I used to
live in Brussels, the capital of Belgium. When I came back to Cyprus a
few years ago, all I could speak was Greek. I wasn’t practicing English
nor French at all. So my first motivation to produce YouTube videos was
simply to practice my English. It was mostly me just recording my voice,
I didn’t care about reaching out to a specific audience and didn’t have
a predetermined plan. It was only afterwards that I discovered free
software on Linux as well as Emacs which gave me something more concrete
and a niche to focus on. From there, my channel grew organically.

**Unlike other YouTubers, your channel seems unconcerned with growing its
following. Is that accurate?**

You’re right, I don’t really care about the channel per se. For me, the
channel itself, whether it grows, whether it makes money, or whether it
becomes popular, is not really of interest. In my opinion, if you put
something like that as your number-one goal, then, whatever you do, you
will instrumentalize that motive in order to pursue that end. If you
have to conform with expectations then you will become the embodiment of
those expectations and you will no longer be yourself. Instead, you will
become someone that conforms with those expectations which will
inevitably dilute what you have to say. Whereas, if you are true to
yourself, you don’t need to do that. It will be sustainable; you can do
it forever.

I think you should put yourself first and then the audience will follow.
Even if there is no audience, what matters is whether you can be
yourself and get the most out of what you are doing. For me that is, at
the end of the day, an intellectual activity that broadens my mind and
satisfies an innate curiosity.

**Then what are your goals for the channel, if you have any at all?**

I don’t want others to follow my channel or to follow me in particular,
in the sense of tracking the minutiae of my life. I want others to focus
more on the principles I talk about. I see the world under political,
social, and human terms, which is not the case for most of those in the
Linux and Emacs communities. Reality does not consist of each person
living in their own bubble; there are systemic magnitudes and structural
issues. Regardless of the topic, I want it to be useful to others by
speaking in a way that can be applied generally to everyday life. For
me, the only long-term objective for the channel is to keep growing
organically and for it to continue being a place where I post my
thoughts in the way I do now. So as long as I get to do my thing, this
will remain a hobby rather than a job. I don’t see it as something that
has to pay dividends.

**What has been the most pleasant lesson you’ve learned from posting
YouTube videos and blogging?**

What surprised me the most was that there exists a whole social and
human element to the free and open source software communities. I
receive emails [from those who have seen my videos] practically every
day now where I discuss topics pertaining to technology but also life in
general. I became impressed by the vibrant communities I found that
exist around these tools.

I learned that they are not just tools; they are also what keeps us
together and I am very happy to be part of this community. These
software are developed by a distributed network of volunteers willing to
disseminate knowledge that has been processed or considered thoroughly,
which is incredibly inspiring. When you are in this kind of community,
you really want to put the best version of yourself out there and be
useful to others.

**What life lessons did you learn from your university experience?**

I studied European politics, law, and economics, which is an
interdisciplinary study. My focus was on European Integration: how the
EU (European Union) has gone from a small coalition of states centered
around a specific set of interests into today’s federal system of sorts.
I’m not interested in politics in the narrow sense of party politics or
in the sense of what person X says about situation A. I am mostly
interested in the bigger picture, which includes not just the political
process — party politics — but also economic implications with social
and cultural dimensions. There is always a broader narrative, something
that we can extract and generalize independent of the specifics of the
case.

Even though I attended university, I came from a working class
background. I didn’t necessarily have the prospects to succeed. Going
into university was actually a luxury for people in my income
distribution. I had to work full time. I didn’t have the university life
of going into campus, going to classes, and then having free time. For
me to attend university and have to study and work full time wasn’t
easy. I was not particularly talented either.

Nevertheless, I actually learned more than what was expected because I
didn’t miss any classes. When we would have homework, the professor
would give us three or four chapters from a book to study, but I would
read the entire book because I wanted to learn. It wasn’t about the
homework itself or the degree; it was about learning the content. Even
over the weekends, I would study if I wasn’t preoccupied with my job.

**As someone who provides a comprehensive and free resource for
autodidacts, what role do you think formal schooling plays in education?**

The university itself cannot teach you anything. You have to teach
yourself. Of course, it offers you a platform to learn. It offers you
everything that you need access to: libraries, one-on-one meetings with
professionals who are experts in their field, like-minded peers.
However, at the end of the day, they cannot do the work for you. You are
the one who has to read the books, study on your own, and think things
through. It’s about learning for your own betterment.

And, of course, when it comes to making sense of the world, when it’s no
longer about assignments, that broadened horizon really helps you see
the bigger picture. University is its own little bubble where you are
safe if you follow the rules and get good grades. You will learn a lot,
of course, but when it comes to the outside world, the world beyond the
confines of the university, you really need to learn to think for
yourself, not just whatever box you were placed in at school,
university, et cetera.

**I am aware that you moved to a remote area in the mountains. What
prompted that decision? Is that related to your belief that we should
always think for ourselves?**

Yes. I grew up in a small city in Greece and lived most of my life in
urban areas. I currently live in mountains located in Cyprus, which is
an island in the eastern part of the Mediterranean Sea. I saw this as an
experiment: I thought I would take the risk and see what happens. Going
back is always an option if I change my mind or get bored and is really
the worst case. The reason for this decision was that I wanted a change
of pace. I wanted someplace that would be literally and metaphorically
far away from the urban “EU bubble” that I felt I was in when living in
Brussels.

I didn’t always have this mindset. My mindset used to be: “Let’s focus
on the task that I have to do. Let’s just conform with the rules of the
game. Let’s just do what we are told to do and see how it goes from
there.” The point is that I thought I was happy. I had fun and work to
do — and enjoyed those moments — but I started to feel that I was not
moving at the pace where I felt I was 100% committed to what I was
doing. I was thinking that I wanted to move in a different direction. I
wanted to go one way, but life was taking me another way. My lifestyle
needed to change. At the time, I was feeling this tension, but I
couldn’t specify it. So, I wanted to take a step back and see how things
stand and reassess them by listening to my mind. I wanted to withdraw,
take things in, think things through, and then commit again.

I think I was really asking myself this: “What are your priorities? Do
you want to put your own wellness first or what is best for your
employer first?” For me, I wanted to prioritize my wellness. If I am
well, if I am fine with myself, if I am focused on what I’m doing, then,
of course, I can also perform in my work. On the other hand, if I must
follow someone else’s schedule or lifestyle, there will be friction
which causes me to not feel 100% comfortable. I won’t be 100% committed
to the cause. Thus, I wanted to take control and see whether I can turn
things around.

It may have been drastic, but it was effective. It has helped me a lot
to escape from the fast pace of city life.

**Would you say that your Linux and Emacs journey is a manifestation of
those values?**

Yes, but I would say that those are epiphenomena, the things that
happened afterwards. What preceded them was this exact change in
mentality. This shift in mindset into a gradually more deliberate
lifestyle, a lifestyle where I control more of the factors that affect
my life. So that was the general principle; to be in control of as many
factors as possible. Of course, I cannot control everything, but to at
least be in charge of whatever I can. This inspired me to search for
alternatives for the software I used to use. And, of course, part of
that process was the discovery of Linux and all the other free software
tools in the free software space, including Emacs.

**What have you learned specifically from living in the mountains?**

Since coming here, I’ve learned a lot from a new freedom to think and
commit to work without any distractions. For example, every morning I go
hiking for an hour or so. Ten kilometers (6.21 miles) is now a regular
walk for me. I think this basic level of fitness can really help your
intellectual pursuits. For example, I wake up in the morning and have
lots of energy because I am in this regular cycle of good fitness and
diet. This gives me the energy needed for the clarity of mind to pursue
other interests. In Ancient Greece it was said that “A healthy mind
exists within a healthy body.” I also hike for the opportunity to be
alone in the mountains with nature. I get the chance to withdraw from
all the noise, literally and metaphorically, and to freely think about
my projects and clarify my thoughts.

But there is also simply the awesomeness of nature. When I stand on a
mountaintop and I see the various open horizons, mountain ranges,
landscapes, and forests, it really revitalizes me. It’s a special
experience that I never had in an urban setting.

**Besides hiking, are there any other hobbies viewers might be surprised
to hear you have?**

I used to be a football player, particularly a midfielder. The reason I
didn’t become a professional is because of an injury. Of course, I enjoy
sports in general. I like to exercise: hiking, running, calisthenics.
These are things which I have been doing since I was in my teens. I also
like to learn about herbs that I come across in the area. After a walk
or hike, I come home and search online for the indigenous ferns and read
about their properties and uses.

**You’ve mentioned your dog. Does he ever accompany you on your adventures?**

Of course! I really like all animals. I do have a dog (cross-breed
between a German Shepherd Dog and an American Pitbull Terrier) named
Atlas, but I also like cats and all sorts of other animals. I have taken
care of dogs for several years, and I see my dogs as part of the family.
They aren’t just pets. They’re really your friends and can help in all
sorts of ways. They’re also my hiking partners — there’s always a dog by
my side when I go out into the mountains.

**Finally, if you had to give your nineteen-year-old self advice, what
would it be?**

In life, you should not always try to accommodate other people’s wants.
At some point you should draw a line and say, “Look, I understand your
circumstances, but you also have to take me into your own account and my
own subjectivity, personality, and specific way of operating.” I think
this is especially true for people who are, like me, quiet and don’t
speak much. I know this may sound weird because all my videos are
basically monologues, but I am the silent, introverted type. So for a
person like me, it’s even more difficult to stand up and say, “Hey, you
need to think of me as well.” Stand up and tell people that you cannot
just be the red carpet upon which others will parade.

*This interview has been edited for length and clarity.*
